# Examining the Effect of Stereotype Threat on Academic Performance

Experiment conducted by Tiffany Cheng, Matt Kinkley, and Prachi Varma in the UC Berkeley MIDS course "Experiments and Causal Inference."

**Abstract**

*Does asking for a subject’s gender and increasing the pressure affect their performance on an academic exam?* There is existing experimental research to suggest that making subjects aware of their own race prior to an exam leads to worse results for black students when compared to white students. There are also additional studies that either make it clear to subjects that the exam shows gender differences or that the exam does not show gender differences, and female students perform worse than male students in the former scenario. Both of these examples show that groups with negative stereotypes surrounding academic achievement tend to perform worse when given subtle reminders of their identity. The intervention we chose for this experiment is as follows: prior to having the subjects answer SAT math questions, we ask for their gender (female, male, or non-binary) and tell them that the exam measures intellectual ability through a series of math questions. This intervention aims to bring the subject’s gender to the forefront and specifically focuses on math questions since females are generally stereotyped to be worse at math than males. One group will receive this intervention and the other group will proceed to the math questions without seeing the gender question or the pressure-inducing sentence. Our findings suggest that there is no heterogeneous treatment effect from our intervention, meaning women who were shown the pressure-inducing statement and asked their gender before taking the math exam did not perform any worse on average than men who received the same treatment. We actually found that the subjects in the treatment group, both men and women, performed better than those who did not receive the experimental intervention. We also found that those in the treatment group were less likely to attrit from the experiment. These results are peculiar as it is possible that our treatment effect was actually motivating rather than stress inducing.
